---
layout: post
title: Predicting Healthcare Annual Expenses

image: /img/medical.jpg
---



With medical expenses ever increasing, I want to look at different factors that how much we pay for healthcare. Then we will try to predict the yearly cost based on the regression models that are used to train out data. 

The features or factors that we will be looking are as follow:
Age
, BMI
, Children
, Sex
, Smoker
, Region

When I run the baseline for the original dataset, we have a baseline of 9091.12 and R^2 of 0. The baseline is the prediction of a very basic model. This prediction is generated before we try to train the date using other regression models for better results. 

This regression graph shows the relationship between the bmi(body mass index) of an individual and the charges. As you can see the correlation between bmi and charges is not strong. We can see that there are individuals with high bmi with lower healthcare expenses than others with low bmi. This shows that there are stronger factors that shape the total cost. 




Now let’s compare healthcare costs between male and female. As expected, male tend to have higher medical expenses and the data shows a longer range for male. This is possibly due to lower life expectancy, lifestyle choices, and there are more male smokers.



An important feature to look at is age. We can see that there is an upward trend as the individual gets older, the higher the medical expenses. This graph shows charges associated with age and bmi. When you add another feature with bmi, you will see a stronger correlation. 


This pairplot breaks down individuals into four separate regions. It appears that the data is cluster mostly in the northwest region. 


After training and fitting our model with linear regression, our mean baseline comes out to 4573.52 with R-square at 0.73. We improved our prediction by fifty percent and approximately three fourths of the observed variation can be explained by the model’s input. 

Prediction:

Age = 37
Smoker = no
Bmi = 22
Children = 2
Sex = male
Region = Northwest

Healthcare charges = $5,260.65 annually 
